1. Introduction

Sewer blockages can wholly or partially prevent waste-water removal, and resultant overflows can damage property and risk public health. As global urban populations increase, cities' wastewater systems face growing pressure while in many places they deteriorate with age.

A region's climate can influence blockage rate. Marlow et al. (2011) showed a correlation between sewer blockage frequency and the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), an indicator of air pressure in the Pacific ocean, in a water utility company in eastern Australia. The SOI reflects changing rainfall patterns in that region. Droughts raise the risk of blockages by decreasing sewer flow volume, and thus increase sedimentation. Low rainfall also promotes tree root development, which damage pipes by intruding through joins and other weak points (DeSilva et al., 2011).

However, while vegetation intrusion is the chief cause of blockages in Australia (Marlow et al., 2011), in the USA 60-75% of blockages have fat, oil and grease (FOG) deposits as a contributory factor (Keener et al., 2008), suggesting an alternative climatic influence on sewer blockages. FOG deposits form in a saponification reaction between calcium soaps and free fatty acids (He et al., 2011), chiefly from restaurants and industrial sources (Keener et al., 2008).  Free fatty acids are insoluble in water, and are transported in greasey effluent. This effluent solidifies at lower temperatures, suggesting that warm weather may reduce the number of sewer blockages caused by lower temperatures.

In this study we use industry datasets to explore the relationship between sewage temperature and the frequency of sewer temperature blockages. We then test the strength of the relationship between daily mean air temperature and sewage temperature to see if air temperature, which is widely available worldwide, can be a useful proxy measure of sewage temperature, which requires specialist equipment, personnel and sampling to acquire. Finally we test whether air temperature can be used directly to predict the occurrence of sewer blockages. Understanding the role of weather and climate in FOG deposit formation and sewer failure will help water authorities predict the vulnerability of their wastewater systems to future climate change.


2. Methods

2.1 Sewer blockage data

Albuquerque water authority respond to sewer blockages following discovery by maintenance workers or reports of substandard drain function from the public. This study used an anonymised dataset of blockage dates and engineers’ estimates of causes. Data from the period January 2009 - January 2013 inclusive were available for this study.

2.2 Sewer temperature data

Sewer temperature data were collected by AWUA personnel during routine maintenance, using XXX probes XXXX etc. Data from the period December 2005 - December 2010 inclusive were available for this study.

2.3 Weather data

Weather data recorded as part of the METAR program at Albuquerque airport (KABQ) were downloaded from Weather Underground (http://www.wunderground.com). This analysis used daily mean temperature as calculated by the METAR protocol. Data were available for each day with sewer blockage or sewage temperature measurements (20XX-20XX)

2.4 Statistical analysis

As most days were without sewer blockages, we calculated the number of blockages per week for use as a response variable. 

Sewage temperature measurements were available from XX manholes, leading to 3 interceptors within Albuquerque. The relationship between air and sewage temperatures was tested using a linear regression model, extracting a mean temperature measurement from the KABQ dataset for each day with a sewage temperature measurement. Akaike’s information criterion (AIC) was used to rank models and model parameters. Air temperature, interceptor identity and manhole identity were tested for usefulness as predictors of sewage temperature. 

XX% days in the dataset were incident-free, and therefore the data were overdispersed (TEST STAT). Models of the number of blockages per day therefore used negative binomial generalised linear models (GLMs) (PACKAGE REFERENCE). Blockage data were aggregated across all interceptors. In the model predicting blockage frequency with sewage temperature, weekly sewage temperature was calculated by simply taking the mean value of all measurements for all days and interceptors that week.

All analysis used R 3.1.0 (R Development Core Team, 2014).


3. Results

3.1 Sewage temperature and sewer blockages

Sewers block more frequently at colder sewage temperatures. This relationship was highly statistically significant, and explained a fairly modest amount of variation.

3.2 Air temperature and sewer temperature

Sewer temperature increases with air temperature, but scales sub-linearly: sewers remain above freezing when air temperature falls below 0C, and similarly do not reach the same peaks as air temperature. There was small but significant variation between interceptors’ and manholes’ responses to temperature, and the highest-ranked candidate model included interceptor as well as air temperature for predicting sewer temperature. This model had moderate predictive power.

3.3 Air temperature and sewer blockages

There were more blockages during colder weeks. Air temperature was a highly significant predictor of sewer blockage frequency, but explained a small amount of variation. 

When blockages were split by cause, blockages for which grease was recorded as a contributory factor were significantly associated with cold weather, whereas there was no relationship between temperature and other blockages.


4. Discussion

Temperature data, which are widely and freely available, have modest utility in predicting sewer blockages over weekly timescales. These results suggest that areas experiencing increasing average temperatures may find that this trend alleviates the pressure placed on sewage systems by FOG deposits. Similarly, weather forecasts and real-time weather observations may prove useful for predicting and responding rapidly to blockages, reducing the threat to property and public health.

Sewage data is a slightly more accurate predictor of blocking frequency. Where these data are regularly collected and rapidly analysed, they could be used in place of air temperature to anticipate problems in sanitation infrastructure. 

The relationship between air and sewage temperature is likely to be mediated by ground temperature, and therefore by groundwater levels. The difference in predictive ability between sewage and air temperature may reflect the variable groundwater levels during the seasonal cycle in Albuquerque. Similarly, differences between interceptors and manholes may reflect elevation and land use, via their effects on groundwater temperature. Models including water table height, land use, soil type, geology and/or precipitation patterns could test this hypothesis. 

With continuing population rise and urbanisation, efficient operation of urban waste-water infrastructure is an increasingly important issue for global public health. REF (DATE) recently highlighted the importance of more research into efficacy of waste-water treatment techniques, particularly in the developing world. The data in this study were not collected specially for research purposes. Rather, this study used data already collected by industry as part of standard operations, married with publicly accessible weather data available online. This demonstrates the potential usefulness of historic industry datasets for addressing future challenges. 